
home
Amaze with your First JavaScript Game
A simple game that will beat your friends whenever it gets the chance
January 2025
The Guiding Principle

There are two ways that I could write this article:

    As a recipe
    As a guide

If I wrote it as a recipe, I would give step-by-step instructions that you could follow without thinking. At the end (and very quickly) you would have a game that works and amazes your friends, but all you would have learned would be how to follow instructions.

I’m not going to do that.

Remember: theres’s 10 days’ worth of course material here for you to work through. It’s worth making an effort.

I choose to write this article as a guide. That means both “as someone who has already travelled this path” and “as a description of what you will see along the way, and what to look out for.” As a result:

    Sometimes, I will lead you down a little side-path, to explore something interesting
    Sometimes, I will go in the wrong direction and there will be an unexpected difficulty that you will need to deal with
    Sometimes, I will ask you to make predictions about what you think will happen next (and you may be wrong)
    Sometimes, I will ask you to use an idea that you have just learnt to solve a new problem on your own
    Sometimes, I will ask a question but I won’t answer it immediately, so that when you see the answer, you will feel a sense of enlightenment.

My hope is that, at the end, you will have understood all the details of what you have done well enough to be able to explain to someone else how to create this game, and how to fix their mistakes. In other words, at the end, I hope you will have mastered these basic JavaScript techniques, and not just used them.

Perhaps this can be your guiding principle: if you can teach others, then it shows that you have really learnt something. Perhaps this is what will truly amaze your friends.
What Needs to be Done

When you play the game, you get caught up in it. (At least, I hope you do.) But in order to create such a game, you have to step back and think, in detail, about what moving parts it needs, and how to make them move. So here’s a list of some of the things that you may have noticed, without realising it.
Things that the game can do

    The game uses text.
    Some of the text is fixed.
    Some of the text is dynamic. It changes a little depending on the circumstances.
    Some of the text sometimes disappears.
    The game uses numbers.
    The numbers can be random, like the initial length of the nail.
    The game asks you to make choices, and it asks you to type a number or a letter to represent your choice.
    The game can make its own choices: what text to show next, what move the computer should make,
    The game seems to use subtraction, because the nail gets shorter after each turn.
    The game uses repetition. You play, the computer plays, you play again, …
    The game makes calculations, so that the computer can win.
    The game knows when the game is over.
    In another kind of repetition, the game can start over from the begininning.

Yes, but how…?

You can turn each of the statements above into a question. “How does the game use text?”, “How does the game make its own choices?”, “How does the game know that the game is over?”

If you already have some knowledge of JavaScript, read the list above again, and see if you can imagine how to deal with each of these items.

You can think of this guide as a thirteen-part TV serial. These are the plot points that will keep you in suspense until the final episode, when all is revealed.
Understanding the Game Logic

The game is simple, but it beats you. Obviously, it is using a simple rule that is easy to implement in code.

Here’s a video about the same game in two different formats, with an explanation by Matt Parker, the stand-up mathematician.

Pay special attention to the part from 4:50 to 6:58. That’s where he describes the simple technique that you will be using in the game.
Thinking in fours

For you, as a human, it seems easy to divide a number (of objects) into groups of four.

How do you imagine you can get a computer to “think” in groups of four?
Setting up our Development Environment

First, you need to set up a Development Environment. You need:

    A way to run JavaScript or NodeJS scripts on your computer
    A code editor which will give you plenty of tools for writing JavaScript.

You may already be ahead of me

If you already have Node and VS Code installed, you can skip this section and the next.
Install NVM, NodeJS and npm

The most comfortable way to install an application that will run JavaScript files on your computer is to install a program called Node Version Manager, or NVM for short.

Here is an excellent article on freeCodeCamp which explains how to do just that.
Typing commands… where?

The article above asks you to type commands like nvm -v. Perhaps you have a question:

“Where exactly do I type these commands?”

The answer is: “In a Terminal window”.

And the answer to your next question is: “Install Microsoft Virtual Studio Code first, as explained below, and VS Code (as it is called, for short) will provide you with an integrated Terminal window.”

As for the answer to your question: “Why didn’t you tell me this before you gave the link for installing Node?”

As you work your way through this guide, you’ll see that I have done my best to help troubleshoot any problems that might arise. But if a problem doesn’t arise for you, you don’t want to be bothered with Too Much Information about what might have gone wrong.

In the future, if you run into difficulties, look a little ahead for an bright orange band with a lifebuoy logo, like the one at the top of this panel. Normally, it will be closed, because I hope that you do not often have problems. Open it up to find troubleshooting suggestions.
Let me know if anything is unclear…

If you find that you are blocked and none of the suggestions I give help you to make any progress, create an issue for me, and I will deal with it as soon as I can.
Install Microsoft Virtual Studio Code

Virtual Studio Code (or VS Code, for short) is a free code editor with many powerful tools that are either built-in or are availble as free extensions.

You can follow the instructions to install VS Code for your operating system, and enjoy all the hard work that other developers have contributed to make your experience of writing code so easy.
A Terminal for installing Node?

If you need a Terminal for installing Node, you can use VS Code’s integrated Terminal.

Indeed, the game you are going to create will be run from VS Code’s integrated Terminal, so you will be spending a lot of time working with it.
Welcome to VSCode

NodeJS is not an application that you can open like a browser or social media app. It does not have a desktop icon you can click on or a Graphic User Interface (or GUI) where you can point and click with your mouse. Instead, you have to control NodeJS from a Terminal.

The best place to find a Terminal is in VS Code. VS Code does have a GUI.
Choosing a colour scheme

When you first launch VS Code, it asks you to choose your what colours to use for the GUI. As a developer, you are going to be looking at your computer screen a lot, so it’s good to be able to choose colours that you find clear and well-contrasted. Most developers choose a dark background with light text, as this is easier on the eyes.
VS Code proposes that you choose a colour scheme
VS Code proposes that you choose a colour scheme

For now, perhaps you will be happy with the default colour scheme. You can always make a different choice later. Click on the Welcome link to hide the Getting Started page.
The Welcome Page

The Welcome Page invites you to explore the possibilities of the app through mini slide shows.
The Welcome Page let you explore the possibilities of the app
The Welcome Page let you explore the possibilities of the app

You can find these guides and more, later, through the Help menu. I suggest that you deselect the Show Welcome Page On Startup checkbox at the bottom of the page, so it won’t keep coming back.
Getting started

To get started, you should create:

    A folder to hold all your future coding projects
    A second folder inside this first folder for the game you are about to create
    A file called main.js where you will write your code.

A First JavaScript File

A successful business has many employees, in many different offices on many different floors, often in many buildings in many cities. A successful development project has the same level of complexity. There will be many different files, in many different folders on many different computers…
Organizing your files

This project is simple. It will only use one file. But you should be ready to grow big quickly, and plan accordingly. It’s therefore important to structure your work properly.

    From the File menu in VS Code, choose Open Folder
    Use the dialog to create a new folder that will hold all your projects that you create from tutorials, like this one. Save it in your Documents folder, or in a place where you can quickly find it again.
    You could call it My Learning Journey or something like that.
    Inside this generic folder, create a folder specifically for this project. I’m going to assume that you call it Nail_It, and I will refer to it by that name from now on.

Create a folder called Nail_It
Create a folder called Nail_It

    Inside the Nail_It folder, create a file called main.js

Create a file in Nail_It called main.js
Create a file in Nail_It called main.js

The .js extension stands for JavaScript. The file that is at the heart of a project is often called main.
Your first script

The first thing on the list of things that the game can do is “The game uses text”. So the first thing you should get your first JavaScript file to do is to use text.

The convention since 1978 is to get your very first program to say “Hello World!”

    In your file at Nail_it/main.js, type the following text:

console.log("Hello World")

JavaScript

    Save your file.

Auto-save

Even better: use the menu item File > Auto Save to tell VS Code to save your file as soon as you have made a change in it. This means that every time you run your code, you can be sure that you are running the most recent version, and not a file that you have changed but forgotten to save.
Set up Auto Save, so that your latest changes are always saved
Set up Auto Save, so that your latest changes are always saved
Executing your script

To run this file as a program, you will need to open a Terminal.

    Choose the menu item Terminal > New Terminal.

By default, a new Terminal will appear a the bottom of the VS Code window.

    Check the name of the folder that is shown in the Terminal. If it is not Nail_It, then type cd (which means change directory) and drag the name of the Nail_It folder into the Terminal, then press Enter.

cd into the Nail_It directory
cd into the Nail_It directory

    When the Terminal is active in the Nail_It directory, type…

    node main.js

    TeX

    … as shown in the Figure 5 above.

You should see Hello World! printed into the Terminal.
Running any JavaScript file the Terminal

You’ll be using node to run other little test scripts soon.

If you downloaded the source files earlier, you can open the folder that contains them in a new VS Code window, and use the Terminal in that window to run any of the files. For example, you could try something like this:

cd /path/to/downloaded/folder
node completed.js

TeX

The completed game also remembers your score against the computer.

(Remember that you type cd (followed by a space) and then can drag the icon of any folder into the Terminal window to navigate to that folder.)
semicolons: ;

JavaScript considers that any block of code that is followed by a semicolon (;) is a complete instruction. But JavaScript is user-friendly. JavaScript also looks at any block of code that is followed by a new line character and thinks: “Hmm… is this a complete instruction?”

In most cases, JavaScript programmers write one instruction per line, so putting a semicolon at the end of each line is usually not necessary. There are, however, some cases where a single instruction may take several lines. There are cases where a semicolon is essential.

I prefer not to use semicolons except in these special cases.
Sometimes, though, I will write two instructions on the same line, separated by a semicolon. So don’t be surprised if you see this.
What is the Console?

I can imagine a question in your mind: How does this code in main.js …

console.log("Hello World")

JavaScript

… plus this command in the Terminal…

node main.js

TeX

… make this text appear in the Terminal?

Hello World!

TeX
The console and console.log()

In NodeJS, “console” is how JavaScript refers to the Terminal where the current script is running. (Later, you’ll see that browsers also have a Console, which behaves very like the Terminal.)
Objects and methods

console is a global object. This means that you can use it anywhere (globally), and that it can have methods and properties. As you will see, JavaScript is built with objects.

A method is something an object can do. A property is something it has. It doesn’t have to have any methods or properties. If you think of a method like a human being:

    It can be like a new-born baby, who can cry but has no possessions yet. (It has methods but no properties)
    It can be like a reclusive miser, who has many possessions but does nothing with them. (It has properties, but no methods)
    It can be like a regular person, who has stuff and does stuff.

The console has several methods but no properties. (It’s like a house elf. It doesn’t need any possessions.)

In this project, you will use the following methods:
method 	action
console.log() 	prints the parameters in the Terminal
console.clear() 	removes all text from the Terminal
Parameters

The data inside the round parentheses (( ... )) is called a parameter. In this case "Hello World!" is the only parameter.
Showing text in the Terminal

You’ll be using console.log() several times in your project, to show text in the Terminal.

As you’ll discover, it can also be used to hide text, but not many people know this. (You don’t have to keep it a secret.)
Quotes or Backticks?

The game that you are about to create shows several lines of text, right at the beginning:

Let's knock a nail into this computer!

* Each player takes a turn to hit the nail once.
* A player can use one of three levels of strength: gently, firmly, hard.
* Depending on the strength used, the nail will be driven more or less deeply into the Terminal.
* The player who knocks the nail all the way in is the winner.

Are you ready?

TeX

You might have noticed that the text in "Hello World!" was surrounded by double quote characters ("). You might think that all you need to do is paste the multiline text that you want to show inside double quotes. But if you do, VS Code shows you lots of wavy red lines, and tells you that you have 52 problems, on for each word that is not in the first line.
VS Code tells you that you have problems with your text
VS Code tells you that you have problems with your text
Using backticks

If you want to create a block of text with more than one line, in JavaScript, you need to use backticks (`).

Backticks can make you feel like a real programmer, if only because you’ve probably never used them before. And also, because you might have to spend some time looking at your keyboard to find where the backtick key is hiding.

Every keyboard manufacturer has their own idea of where to hide the backtick character on your keyboard.
Fix your code

When you have found the backtick key:

    In main.js, replace the double-quote characters with single backticks, one at the beginning, and one at the end of the text.
    In the Terminal, run:

node main.js

TeX

You should see your multiline block of text appear, as shown in Figure 7 below.
Replace the ” double-quotes with ` backticks
Replace the ” double-quotes with ` backticks
Strings

From the early days of computing, sequences of characters have been referred to as strings. This is because they are treated as continuous groups, just like beads on a string.

From now on, the word “string” will mean:

A sequence of characters enclosed either by:

    single quote marks (') or by
    double quote marks (") or by
    back-ticks (`)

In section XX. Working with strings, you’ll see how to join strings together to create sentences dynamically.
All about backticks and template literals

Multiple Cursors

If you look carefully at Figure 7, or less carefully at the images below, you will see that there are two text insertion cursors: one just after each backtick.
VS Code allows you to use multiple text insertion cursors
VS Code allows you to use multiple text insertion cursors

Programmers type a lot. VS Code provides many techniques for allowing programmers to type less.

For more details, see the official Multicursor documentation. Try the following:

    Press Alt and Click wherever you want to add a cursor
    Press Alt and Click on a cursor if you want to delete it
    Press Shift-Alt and Click on a different line to select a rectangular block
    Press Alt and Double-Click on a word to select the entire word

Asking Questions

To be exact, there is another line of text that appears when the game starts:
The last line of text is a question about who is going to play first
The last line of text is a question about who is going to play first
NodeJS Packages

NodeJS does not provide an out-of-the-box solution for asking questions.

You can think of NodeJS like a food mixer: a powerful engine to which you can attach different accessories for different purposes. Some accessories are sold separately.
A food mixer with extra accessories
File:Kenwood Chef-01ASD.jpg

CC BY-SA 4.0 by Asurnipal | source
A food mixer with extra accessories

The “accessories” that you can add to NodeJS are called “modules” or “packages”. The web site npm (whose name does not mean Node Package Manager) provides thousands of open-source packages, many of which are used millions of times every month.

A popular package that you can use to ask questions in the Terminal is readline-sync. (The “sync” is short for “synchronous”. )
Installing readline-sync

When you installed NodeJS, a program called npm was installed at the same time. You can use this program to fetch NodeJS packages from the npmjs.com website, and include them in your project. Here’s how you can do this:

    Make sure your computer is connected to the Internet
    In the Terminal for your Nail_It directory, run:

npm install readline-sync

TeX
npm i

Like me, and most programmers, you can be lazy. You can use i as a shortcut for install.

This command will have exactly the same effect:

npm i readline-sync

TeX
Installing readline-sync
Installing readline-sync

You’ll see several things happen:

    There will be a burst of activity in your Terminal as npm requests and then receives the files that you need.
    A folder called node_modules will be created in your Nail_It folder
    Two new files will be added to your Nail_It folder:
        package.json
        package-lock.json

package.json

The contents of package.json should look something like this (the version number may be different):

{
  "dependencies": {
    "readline-sync": "^1.4.10"
  }
}

JSON
JSON and package.json

Using readline-sync

Before you can use readline-sync, you need to load its code into your own script. You can use the JavaScript function require, as shown in the code below.
Get it working, then learn how

Try this out.

    Edit your script
    In the Terminal, run

node main.js

TeX

    In the Terminal, press the y key, in response to the question.

The expected output is shown in Figure 11 below.

I’ll explain in the next section exactly what is happening, why player: true appears in the Terminal when you run your script, and how you can find out for yourself how to make all this happen.

const readlineSync = require('readline-sync')
const whoStarts = `If you want to start, type Y.
If you want me to start press any other key. `

console.log(`Let's knock a nail into this computer!

* Each player takes a turn to hit the nail once.
* A player can hit the nail in one of three ways:
  gently, firmly, hard.
* Depending on the force used, the nail will be
  driven more or less deeply into the Terminal.
* The player who knocks the nail all the way in
  is the winner.

Are you ready?
`)

let player = readlineSync.keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log("player:", player)

JavaScript
Integrating readline-sync into your project
Integrating readline-sync into your project
Declaring Variables with const and let

Here are the new lines of code again:

const readlineSync = require("readline-sync")
const whoStarts = "If you want to start, type Y. If you want me to start, press any other key. "

JavaScript

// lines skipped //

let player = readlineSync.keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log("player:", player)

JavaScript
What’s new

Below is a list of things that you have not seen before, in the order in which they appear. I’ll explain items 1 - 3 and item 5 in this section, and deal with the others in the following sections.

    const
    variables
    assignment with =
    require()
    let
    readlineSync.keyInYN()
    console.log() with two parameters

Thinking like a computer

Here’s a new metaphor. You can think of NodeJS as being a long line of identical houses, each with its own specific address.
Terraced Houses, each with its own address
Terraced Houses in Lower Park Street

cc-by-sa/2.0 - © Rob Noble - geograph.org.uk/p/1870300
Terraced Houses, each with its own address

People like to give their houses a name, but for the postal delivery worker, the house number is required and is the only official designation for the house.
Sign showning a house number and the house’s name
Sign showning a house number and the house’s name

CC BY-SA 4.0 by Tony Santiago | original
Sign showning a house number and the house’s name

When you write JavaScript, you talk about variables, not houses, and the space defined by each address is actually a block of Random Access Memory (RAM). However, the principle is the same. You, the human, create a name for a block of memory, and the NodeJS associates that name with a number in its index of available blocks, so it knows which memory block you are talking about.

In my metaphor, you put an agent, or just some stuff, in each named house, then the agents work together with the stuff that you have given them to build a display on the street (the end-user’s screen) that the end-user can interact with.

In the world of JavaScript, your code assigns a value to each named variable. When you use a variable name later, JavaScript looks up the number of the memory block in its index, and uses the contents of the block instead of its name.
const vs let

const and let are two ways of telling JavaScript to create a named space in its RAM.

const tells JavaScript: “Here is some data, it will be constant, it will never change.” As a result, JavaScript can optimize the space for the data. This is like when you buy a house. You become the permanent owner, and once the initial paperwork is done, everything is simple. You live there: that’s it.

Because the value in a variable created const has a fixed value, you must give a value as soon as you declare the variable.

let tells NodeJS: “You know, I need some space, but I can’t be sure how much or what I’ll use it for, and I might change my mind. Can you create a space that can get bigger or smaller and that can hold a string of text or a number or an object with many functions… or just about anything?”

When you use let, JavaScript has to be prepared for changes. This is like when you let out your house. You don’t know what the new tenants are going to do to it, so you need to make an inventory, prepare a lease, ask for a deposit, … all sort of extra things. And this has to be renewed each time the tenant changes.

Because the value in a variable created let can change, you can declare the variable without giving it a value. This is perfectly good code:

let variableWithNoInitialValue

JavaScript

This will cause an error:

const constantsMustBeAssignedAValue

JavaScript
You must give a const variable a value when you create it
You must give a const variable a value when you create it
Use const when possible

Your code will work faster (and your end-users will be happier) if you declare your variables const every time you can.
Variable names

I’ve used the variable names readlineSync, whoStarts and player. The name of the Node Package that you installed was readline-sync. Why didn’t I use readline-sync for the name of the variable?

Computing is all about speed. If JavaScript allowed me to use any name, then it would have to spend more time looking at each name to be sure that it was a name and not some other kind of data. So JavaScript has rules:

    A variable name can begin with a letter, a dollar sign ($) or an underscore (_)
    A variable name can contain letters, dollar signs, underscores and numbers (but it can’t start with a number)
    A variable name cannot contain a space () or a dash (-) (so readline-sync is not possible)

Variable naming conventions

By convention, when a variable is created from more than one word (like whoStarts), the first letter in each word is written in uppercase letters. This is called camelCase.
Other variable formats

Variables should have descriptive names

You can call a variable anything. The script minified.js uses single letter names for each variable. Here’s are a couple of extracts:

const t="If you want to start, type Y. If you want me to start, press any other key. ";const n="The nail is ";const l=" units long."

JavaScript

// more obfuscated code //

let M=e.keyInYN(t,O);let T=!M

JavaScript

This code works, but it is very hard to read.

You should always choose meaningful names for your variables, even if they are quite long. Each variable name should describe the data it contains. When future-you or a colleague reads your code, a good choice of names will save you a lot of time in understanding what the code does.
Equals signs

In JavaScript, a single equals sign (=) is used to assign a value to a variable (or to use the house metaphor, to tell JavaScript to move a given piece of data into a named address). So…

const whoStarts = "If you want to start..."

TeX

… tells JavaScript:

    Select a block of memory at an address that I will call whoStarts.
    The contents of this memory block are not going to change. They will be constant.
    Assign the string “If you want to start…” to this memory block.
    In the future, when I refer to whoStarts, use the contents of the memory block instead.

===

As you will see shortly, three equals signs together (===) means “is identical to”. This creates an expression which can be either true or false. For example: 2 + 2 === 4 is true, but 2 + 2 === "four" is false. But more about this later.
require() and Modules

Here’s an edited version of the first few lines of code:

const readlineSync = require("readline-sync")
const whoStarts = "If you want to start, type Y..." // shortened

JavaScript

// lines skipped //

let player = readlineSync.keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log("player:", player)

JavaScript

You’ve seen that readlineSync somehow allows you to type a letter in the Terminal, and then JavaScript knows if that letter was a Y or not. But where does readlineSync get all this power from? And how could you have guessed to use .keyInYN() to make this happen?
require() - a global function

The function require() is a native part of JavaScript. You can use it anywhere. It expects the name the parameter to be either…

    The name of a module

… or:

    The path to a file which contains a module script.

It then loads the module script that it finds at the designated place, and makes it available to your script.
Finding readline-sync

When NodeJS reads require("readline-sync"), it understands that "readline-sync" is not the path to a file, so it looks:

    Inside the node_modules folder for a folder with the same name
    Inside that folder for a package.json file
    Inside the package.json file for an entry for “main”
    For the file named by “main”.

Here’s what it finds:

  "main": "./lib/readline-sync.js",

JSON
How require finds the node_modules file to load
How require finds the node_modules file to load

JavaScript now reads all the code that it finds in the file at node_modules/readline-sync/lib/readline-sync.js, and executes it.
TL;DR

Don’t worry. I don’t expect the code below to mean anything to you. I’m just showing you that all the code in a Node Module package is openly available. There’s no hidden magic.

The code in readline-sync.js includes the following (minor edit for clarity):

function _keyInYN(query, options, limit) {
  var res;
  if (query == null) { query = 'Are you sure? '; }
  if ((!options || options.guide !== false) && (query += '')) {
    query = query.replace(/\s*:?\s*$/, '') + ' [y/n]: ';
  }
  /* eslint-disable key-spacing */
  res = exports.keyIn(query, margeOptions(options, {
    // -------- forced
    hideEchoBack:       false,
    limit:              limit,
    trueValue:          'y',
    falseValue:         'n',
    caseSensitive:      false
    // mask doesn't work.
  }));
  // added:     guide
  /* eslint-enable key-spacing */
  return typeof res === 'boolean' ? res : '';
}
exports.keyInYN = function(query, options) {
  return _keyInYN(query, options);
};

JavaScript

There, on line 1240 in node_modules/readline-sync/lib/readline-sync.js, is the function keyInYN, which your JavaScript can now use, thanks to the require() function.
A black box

You can consider the contents of node_modules to be a black box. You don’t need to understand how it works, just like you don’t need to understand how your phone works. All you need to know is that, if you give the right input, you will get the output that you need.

I’ve just shown you how to look inside this black box, so that you can see the sort of content that it contains, but you may never need to do this again. It’s enough to know that it works.
Using Documentation
An important part of development

As a developer, you are going to being reading a lot of documentation. If you look at the home page for JavaScript on the Mozilla Developers Network, you’ll see that there are hundreds of topics to be covered. Look at the scrollbar in the image below, to understand how much is hidden.
Just part of the menu of topics in the MDN JavaScript reference
Just part of the menu of topics in the MDN JavaScript reference

No developer on Earth knows more than a fraction of this by heart. No developer on Earth even uses more than a fraction of all the possibilities available. As you will soon discover, you can do excellent work with only a few simple techniques.

Even when you have used a particular feature regularly, after a few days your brain will start to forget the details. You will need to look up the exact wording to use. And new tools and features appear regularly, so there will always be something new to learn that did not exist until recently.

Consulting documentation is an important part of development.
Playing with readline-sync

You can find the documentation for the readline-sync package here. Take your time to read it. And as you are reading it, try the examples for yourself, as described below.

There is nothing that I can tell you about the readline-sync package that I did not find in this documentation page, so you can learn about it exactly the same way that I did.
Micro projects in a sandbox

When I am working on a big project and I need to learn a new technique, I:

    Stop working on the big project
    Create a separate micro project, where I can:
        Build a proof-of-concept
        Make experiments
        Make mistakes
        Test ideas
        Develop my understanding
        Build a working template that I can import into my big project
        Write up comprehensive notes for future-me

Whenever you see a sand-coloured box like this, you’ll get the chance to do something similar.

    Open a new Terminal

Use Terminal > New Terminal, or click the + button to create a new Terminal
Use Terminal > New Terminal, or click the + button to create a new Terminal

    Assuming that your Terminal is open on the parent directory (My Learning Journey), you can run:

code Nail_It/Tests/readline-sync/index.js

TeX

The code at the beginning of the command refers to VS Code. This line tells VS Code to create a file called index.js at the location given. You will see a new editor tab open, with the name index.js •. The big round dot means “this file has not been saved yet”, so you need one more step to bring it into existence.
The code command will open a new tab in the text editor
The code command will open a new tab in the text editor

    Save the empty file

VS Code will now create all the intervening folders and the index.js file itself.
VS Code creates all the folders when it saves the index.js file
VS Code creates all the folders when it saves the index.js file

    Run the command:

cd Nail_It/Tests/readline-sync 

TeX

This will change the directory so that this new Terminal window will now be active in the new readline-sync directory.
Use cd to change directory
Use cd to change directory

    Visit the readline-sync documentation page
    Copy the code that is given for the first “Simple case” (slightly edited below):

const readlineSync = require('readline-sync');
 
// Wait for user's response.
const userName = readlineSync.question ('What is your name? ');
console.log('Hi ' + userName + '!');
 
// Handle secret text (e.g. password).
const favFood = readlineSync.question (
  'What is your favorite food? ',
  { hideEchoBack: true } // shows `*` instead of typed text.
);
console.log('Oh, ' + userName + ' loves ' + favFood + '!');

JavaScript
var

The original documentation uses var to declare a variable name.

The const and let keywords were added in 2016, and they do a much better job than var, which is now outdated. You will see var only in older projects, and in certain very specific cases where a variable may be re-declared.

You can learn more about var, const and let in this freeCodeCamp article.

    Paste this code into your file at Nail_It/Tests/readline-sync/index.js
    Run the command:

node index.js

TeX

    Answer the questions that you are given. Notice that you have to press Enter at the end of each answer.

    Now the playful part:
        Edit the code in index.js so that you see different questions when you run node index.js.
        After each change, and before you run node index.js, see if you can predict what will happen.
        Pay attention to where spaces are needed.
        See if you can understand how the + operator works when it is placed between two strings. (You’ll see this in more detail later.)
        See what happens (if anything) when you change single quotes (') to double quotes ("). What happens if you use one of each for the same string?
        What happens if you use hideEchoBack: false?

The options object

Notice how hideEchoBack is written inside curly braces ({ ... }). This structure generates an object which has key-value pairs. Here’s another object to illustrate this:

{ key: "value", anotherKey: "another value", "a third key": 3 }

JavaScript

There are rules about how the names of the keys can be formed. They are similar to the rules for variable names. However, you can create a key name with any character in it, if you enclosed the key name with quotation marks.

Take your time. Have fun. Move on to the next section when you are ready.
Working with keyInYN

In the documentation for the readline-sync package, the next example is:

        Get the user’s response by a single key without the Enter key:

    const readlineSync = require('readline-sync');
    if (readlineSync.keyInYN('Do you want this module?')) {
      // 'Y' key was pressed.
      console.log('Installing now...');
      // Do something...
    } else {
      // Another key was pressed.
      console.log('Searching for another...');
      // Do something...
    }

    JavaScript

    Create a new file in your Tests/ folder and call it keyInYN.js
    Look at the code above. Predict what you will see in the Terminal when you run it.
    Run:

node keyInYN.js

TeX

    Press the Y key
    Look at the output. Was your prediction correct?
    Repeat steps 3 - 5 again, but press the N key.
    Repeat steps 3 - 5 again, but press a completely different key.

When you press Y, you should see Installing now... in the Terminal. When you press N or any other key you should see Searching for another... in the Terminal.
Yes, No or …?

Here’s a challenge.

Can you rewrite the code so that it shows exactly the value that the keyInYN() method returns, instead of a string like ‘Installing now…’ or ‘Searching for another…’?

It should show true if Y is pressed, false if N is pressed or nothing if another key is pressed.

Hint: the file you created at Nail_It/main.js already does this. You can copy ideas from there.
Solution

Showing the output of keyInYN
Bonus question





Bonus Solution

With { guide: false }, the string [y\n] is not shown
A Few Words about True and False

You’ve seen the keywords true and false a few times now.

In JavaScript, these two special values, true and false, are not words or numbers or objects: they are boolean.

Boolean Logic is a branch of mathematics that deals with whether things are true or false. It is named after George Boole, who invented this branch.

For example, the expression “The human player pressed the Y key” can be either true (Yes, the player pressed the Y key) or false (The player hasn’t pressed any key yet, or the key the player pressed was not Y).
if … else …

You’ve also seen code in the documentation for the readline-sync package with a statement using if ... else ...:

if (readlineSync.keyInYN('Do you want this module?')) {
  // 'Y' key was pressed.
  console.log('Installing now...');
  // Do something...
} else {
  // Another key was pressed.
  console.log('Searching for another...');
  // Do something...
}

JavaScript

Your Nail It! game needs to make decisions about what to do next. So far, you have got it to ask the user if they want to start. Your main.js script has a variable called player, whose value may be true (if the human player pressed the Y key), or something that is not true. So it knows whether the human player chose to go first or not.

If the player chose to play first, your script needs to ask how hard they want to hit the nail. If the user chose not to play first, then the script must decide how hard the AI should hit the nail.

To get your game to make such a decision, you can use a statement with two branches, like the one above. In your case, it will be more like:

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  // TODO: ask the human player for a number between 1 and 3
} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  // TODO: choose the number between 1 and 3 to ensure AI wins
  // (if possible)
}

JavaScript

If the expression in round parentheses (( ... )) immediately after if evaluates to true, the JavaScript will run the code inside the first block enclosed by curly brackets ({ ... }).

If the expression in round parentheses (( ... )) immediately after if evaluates to false, the code inside the curly-bracket block after the word else will be run.

Either the if code or the else code will be run, but not both.
Comments

Not everything in a JavaScript file is active code. You can add comments, like those shown above, by putting a double slash (//) to the left of any text that is not code. The JavaScript engine will ignore anything from that point until the end of the line.

You can also put /* before a comment section and */ after it. You can do this in the middle of a line or to span many lines.

In the code above, the comments indicate what code still has to be written. In other cases, you can use comments to explain what the code does. This is especially important if the logic is complex.
Truthy and falsy

In the last section, you saw that the value generated by ’keyInYN()` can be:

    true if the user presses the Y key
    false if the user presses the N key
    “” (an empty string) if the user presses any other key

JavaScript has an … interesting way of considering whether something is true or not. You can read more about this in the article for Truthy on the MDN web site.

In short, JavaScript treats the number 0, the empty string "" and a few other empty values as false. In a moment, you’ll see the value undefined. That’s another value that JavaScript treats false. These values are said to be falsy.

Conversely, JavaScript treats anything that is not false or 0 or empty as true… even the word "false", because "false" contains letters, so it’s not empty. Anything that is not false or falsy is truthy.

To convert something truthy to false, or to convert something falsy to true, you can use the logical not operator (!). (See the examples in the sandbox below.)

Later in this project, you’ll see a trick to convert true to 1 and false to 0.
Playing with node in the Terminal

For testing, you can run an Interactive Development Environment (IDE) for Node in a Terminal.

Open a new Terminal, and try this:

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> if (true) console.log("This", /* "but not this", */ "and that")
This and that
undefined
> if (false) console.log("Nothing will be printed")
undefined
> if ("false") console.log("The word 'false' is truthy")
The word 'false' is truthy
undefined
> if (0) console.log("Zero is falsy")
undefined

TeX

When an expression is false or falsy, an if statement will ignore any instructions associated with it.

The undefined text simply means that console.log() did not generate a value. When you call readlineSync.keyInYN(), it generates a value, but console.log() just logs data quietly to the console.

Try these expressions in the Node IDE. All the following should evaluate to true:

2 === 2
4 > 2
length = 2; length === 2
force = 3; length - force === -1
length + force < 6
"length" + "force" === "lengthforce"
!false

JavaScript

Note my use of a semicolon in the line length = 2; length === 2. This means:

    Instruction 1: Assign the value 2 to the variable length
    Instruction 2: Tell me if the value of length is identical to 2.

The semicolon allows me to write two instructions on one line.

All the following should evaluate to false

!true
2 != 2
4 < 2
"length" === 2
length - force > 0
"length" + "force" < 6
!"false"

JavaScript
No variable declarations in the Node IDE?

I did not declare any of the variables that I used in the Node IDE in the sandbox examples above. As a result, JavaScript automatically use created variables with the old-fashioned var method.

Because I am using the Node IDE just to test simple ideas, it’s more convenient to create variables without declaring them.
Choosing a Number

The third example in documentation for the readline-sync package, is something like the code that follows.
Edited for clarity

I’ve edited a bit for clarity. Can you spot the differences?

In particular, the first line selects keyInSelect directly from the readline-sync code, using a technique known as destructuring assignment.

        Let the user choose an item from a list:

    const { keyInSelect } = require('readline-sync')
    const animals = [
      'Lion',
      'Elephant',
      'Crocodile',
      'Giraffe',
      'Hippo'
    ]
    const question = 'Which animal?'
    const index = keyInSelect(animals, question)
    console.log(
      'Ok, ' + animals[index] + ' goes to your room.'
    )

JavaScript

In the Terminal:

[1] Lion  
[2] Elephant  
[3] Crocodile  
[4] Giraffe  
[5] Hippo  
[0] CANCEL  
 
Which animal? [1...5 / 0]: 2  
Ok, Elephant goes to your room.

TeX

To test this example:

    Using your Terminal, create a new file:

code keyInSelect.js

TeX

    Paste the code above into your new script file.
    In the Terminal, run:

node keyInSelect.js

TeX
Testing keyInSelect() in a new script
Testing keyInSelect() in a new script

It works exactly as advertised. But for your game, you want a number, not an animal. You are going to have to change this code, and see exactly what is going on inside it.
Adapting for the Nail It! game

You can edit the code in your new keyInSelect.js file so that it asks the question that you will need for the Nail It! game:

const { keyInSelect } = require('readline-sync')
const strength = [
  'gently',
  'firmly',
  'hard'
]
const question = 'How hard do you plan to hit?'
const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)
console.log(
  "index:", index
)

JavaScript

Notice that instead of using console.log() to show the name of the item that is chosen, the code above logs the value of the index returned by keyInSelect(), directly. The result may surprise you.
The value of index is 1 less than the number you press
The value of index is 1 less than the number you press

You can try it several times. The value of index that is logged will always be 1 less than the number you press.

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 0
index: -1

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 1
index: 0

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 2
index: 1

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
index: 2

TeX
Is this a bug or a feature?
Arrays and index Zero

The animal names in the last example are stored in an array. An array is identified by square brackets ([ ... ]) enclosing a number of items separated by commas.

Arrays allow you to store a list of items. Here the items are words, but they could be any type of data, including other arrays.

Any white space (such as space characters or new lines) between the items is ignored. Both these arrangements of text have exactly the same effect:

animals = ['Lion', 'Elephant', 'Crocodile', 'Giraffe', 'Hippo']

JavaScript

animals = [
  'Lion',
  'Elephant',
  'Crocodile',
  'Giraffe',
  'Hippo'
]

JavaScript
The house metaphor

You can think of an array as a block of flats. For the computer, the array is located at a particular memory address, but the items within the array have their own addresses, just like each floor in a block of flats has its own floor number.

In the UK, Canada, Australia and some other countries, you walk into a block of flats on the ground floor. You have to go up one flight of stairs to get to “the first floor”. The lift will show the number 0 for the ground floor. (In the USA, the first floor is at street level. The elevator will show the number 1 for this floor.)
Counting from zero
Elevator button building. A close up of a metal elevator with numbers

CC0 1.0 Universal | source
Counting from zero

JavaScript, like the UK, counts from zero.

The “block of flats” metaphor breaks really quickly. In JavaScript, it is easy to add and remove items from an array. It’s not at all easy to add or remove floors from a block of flats.

The important thing to note is that an array has its own address in memory, and that all the items within it can be found at that address. You will use a human-readable variable name to represent this memory address. The items in the array can change, just like people can move in and out of their flats, but the variable name will always refer to the space where the current items can be found.
Counting from zero

To access a particular item in an array, you write the array name followed by square brackets which contain an integer. For example:

animals[1]

JavaScript

For practical and theoretical reasons, arrays in JavaScript start counting from zero, not from 1. There are zero items before ‘Lion’, so animals[0] refers to ‘Lion’.
animals[index]

In the script that you have originally copied, the variable index receives an integer from keyInSelect(). When you press the number 2 key on your keyboard (to select the Elephant), keyInSelect() returns the number 1, because JavaScript considers that animals[1] is ‘Elephant’.

const index = keyInSelect(animals, question)
console.log(
  'Ok, ' + animals[index] + ' goes to your room.'
)

JavaScript

The adjusted value of index ensures that the output in the Terminal shows the correct animal name.

[1] Lion  
[2] Elephant  
[3] Crocodile  
[4] Giraffe  
[5] Hippo  
[0] CANCEL  
 
Which animal? [1...5 / 0]: 2  
Ok, Elephant goes to your room.

TeX
A feature, not a bug

You can edit your keyInSelect.js file to show that the value of index corresponds to the expected item in the strength array:

const { keyInSelect } = require('readline-sync')
const strength = [
  'gently',
  'firmly',
  'hard'
]
const question = 'How hard do you plan to hit?'
const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)
console.log(
  "index:", index,
  "strength:", strength[index]
)

JavaScript
When you log strength[index] you get the value you expect
When you log strength[index] you get the value you expect
Adjusting for force

In the final version of your game, vhen you hit the nail “gently”, the value returned by keyInSelect() will be 0, but nail will get driven 1 unit into its support.

Conversely, when the AI hits the nail with a force of 3 (for example), the Terminal should show "I hit the nail hard", where “hard” is found at strength[2].

You are going to have to pay attention to this. The adjustment will be in a different direction for the player as for the AI.
The power of arrays

This project uses arrays in a very limited way. In the future, you will be using the power of arrays in many different circumstances. I won’t describe all the things that arrays can do, but you can check out the documentation on the MDN website any time you need to know more.
Deleting Text from the Terminal

So far, you have prepared code that can:

    Display text in the Terminal
    Ask the player a Yes-or-No question
    Ask the player to press a number key.

That’s good progress.

Before moving on to drawing the nail, there are still two more trick that you can learn from the readline-sync documentation.

Here’s the code from the next example in the readline-sync documentation. I haven’t made any changes to it, because I plan to change it quite radically.

        An UI like the Range Slider: (Press Z or X key to change a value, and Space Bar to exit)

    var readlineSync = require('readline-sync'),
      MAX = 60, MIN = 0, value = 30, key;
    console.log('\n\n' + (new Array(20)).join(' ') +
      '[Z] <- -> [X]  FIX: [SPACE]\n');
    while (true) {
      console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K|' +
        (new Array(value + 1)).join('-') + 'O' +
        (new Array(MAX - value + 1)).join('-') + '| ' + value);
      key = readlineSync.keyIn('',
        {hideEchoBack: true, mask: '', limit: 'zx '});
      if (key === 'z') { if (value > MIN) { value--; } }
      else if (key === 'x') { if (value < MAX) { value++; } }
      else { break; }
    }

    JavaScript

This code creates an interactive slider. Here’s how you can test it:

    Create a new file in your Tests/readline-sync/ folder:

code slider.js

TeX

    Paste the code shown above into the new file.
    Save your changes.
    In the Terminal, execute the command:

node slider.js

TeX

    Press the Z and the X keys to make the 0 move left and right, and to update the number shown on the right
    Press the space bar to stop the interaction.

The first trick makes something vanish

Did you find it surprising that display of the slider bar changed after it was first displayed? Somehow, the code in your slider.js script is rewriting the same line in the Terminal, with a different value each time.

Look at the code. Is there a chunk of code that looks really strange?

Or to put it another way: Can you guess what this code does?

console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K')

JavaScript

Do you think it might be connected with the way the slider bar updates itself?
Exploring something new

Here’s how you could test what it does.

    Create a new file in a new subfolder of your Nail_It/Tests/ folder:

code ../strings/deleteLines.js

TeX

This line says:

* code             Hey VS Code!
* ..               Move to the parent folder of this
                   `readline-sync/` folder (that is: move
                   to the `Nail_It/Tests/` folder)
* /string          Create a new folder there called `string`
* /deleteLines.js  Create a JavaScript file there called
                   `deleteLines.js`

TeX

    Paste the following code into your new file:

console.log(10)
console.log(9)
console.log(8)
console.log(7)
console.log(6)
console.log(5)
console.log(4)
console.log(3)
console.log(2)
console.log(1)
console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K')

JavaScript

    Save the new deleteLines.js file.
    Tell the Terminal that you want to change directories, to work in the new Nail_It/Tests/strings/ folder:

cd ../strings

TeX

    Run the script that you have just created:

node deleteLines.js

TeX
console.log('\\x1B\[1A\\x1B\[K') deletes the last line
console.log('\\x1B\[1A\\x1B\[K') deletes the last line

You are used to seeing console.log() printing text in the Terminal, but the result of console.log(1) does not appear. In fact it was printed, and then the line console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K') deleted it again.
Can you delete more than one line?

Can you change deleteLines.js so that the last console.log() line deletes more than one line?

OK. I’ll help you with this one. JavaScript has a method called repeat() that you can use with a string. Here’s how it works:

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> "blah ".repeat(3)
'blah blah blah '

TeX
Solution

Use the .repeat() method to delete 9 lines
Never Repeat a Trick?

One rule of illusionists is never to repeat a trick. If the audience knows what is going to happen, they will watch more closely, and they might notice something the illusionist does not want them to see.

But the slider.js example allowed you to press the Z and the X keys multiple times. Each time, the 0 moved one step to the left or right. How did the code do that?

This is an important question, because, in your game, you are going to ask the player to hit the nail several times.

So now that you know what the illusionist code is going to do, you can watch more closely and see if you can notice the trick:

var readlineSync = require('readline-sync'),
  MAX = 60, MIN = 0, value = 30, key;
console.log('\n\n' + (new Array(20)).join(' ') +
  '[Z] <- -> [X]  FIX: [SPACE]\n');
while (true) {
  console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K|' +
    (new Array(value + 1)).join('-') + 'O' +
    (new Array(MAX - value + 1)).join('-') + '| ' + value);
  key = readlineSync.keyIn('',
    {hideEchoBack: true, mask: '', limit: 'zx '});
  if (key === 'z') { if (value > MIN) { value--; } }
  else if (key === 'x') { if (value < MAX) { value++; } }
  else { break; }
}

JavaScript
A while loops

The slider example uses a while loop.

It loops around, checking if you have typed in one of the characters Z, X or space. If you typed Z or X, it updates the position of the 0 and the number on the right. If you pressed the space bar, it breaks out of the loop and stops.
while (true)

A loop that is set up using while (true) will continue forever unless the command break is used somewhere inside the loop.

In your game, you want to stop the game when the nail has been fully hammered in. Here’s how you could do that:
Leaving a while loop

    Create a new file called while.js:

code while.js

TeX

    Paste the following code into it:

let length = 12
while (length) {
  console.log("Nail length: " + length)
  length = length - 1
}
console.log("length:", length)

JavaScript

    In the Terminal window, run:

node while.js

TeX

This is what you should see in the Terminal:
The while loop stops when length reaches 0
The while loop stops when length reaches 0
Points to note

    The value of the variable length is going to change, so it has to be declared with let. If you use const, JavaScript will tell you that you made an error. (Try it.)
    When length has a value greater than 0, the while loop behaves as if length were true: length is truthy.
    length = length - 1 subtracts 1 from length, each time that line of code is executed.
    When length reaches zero, the while loop stops looping.
    When you use the + operator between a string ("Nail length ") and a number (for example: 12), JavaScript does not add them. It concatenates them, or strings them together.

Using the Debugger

Wouldn’t it be good if you could look inside the JavaScript engine, to see what JavaScript is doing? In the last section, you saw the output of the while loop, but you couldn’t see the process.

With VS Code’s debugger, you can step through the code, line by line as it is executing, and watch which line is executed next, and how the variables change.

Running code in the debugger is like turning the pages of a flipbook. You can run through several steps automatically, and then stop at a point which interests you.
Taking the time to study each pages of a flipbook
Daumenkino kol

CC BY-SA 3.0 by de:Technische Sammlungen der Stadt Dresden | source
Taking the time to study each pages of a flipbook

So here goes:

    Start by creating a breakpoint on line 1 of your script. A breakpoint is a point in your code where you tell the debugger: “Stop here. I want to look at this bit closely.” To do this, move your mouse just to the left of the column of line numbers. A dark red dot should appear. Click to make the red dot brighter, and to fix it in place.

Add a breakpoint on line 1
Add a breakpoint on line 1

    Select the menu item Run > Start Debugging. You’ll see that there is a keyboard shortcut — F5 — that you can use in the future.

Choose Run > Start Debugging, or press F5
Choose Run > Start Debugging, or press F5
Using keyboard shortcuts

Moving your hand from the keyboard to your mouse or your trackpad takes time. Pressing a keyboard shortcut is always faster. Time is the one thing that you can’t get any more of.

If a professional developer is watching you work, and you use your mouse to activate items in a menu or a contextual menu, the professional will see that you are still a beginner. This might not be the impression that you want to give.

It is well worthwhile taking the time to learn (or create) shortcuts for actions that you use regularly.
A Note about the F keys

The fn key may be anywhere on your keyboard

Choosing the debugger language

    The Command Palette will open and ask you what kind of script you want to debug. Because the extension of your file is .js, it will guess you want Node.js. Click the line Node.js to confirm.

Select the debugger for Node.js
Select the debugger for Node.js

    The debugger will start running your script, but it will stop before it executes the first line, because you place a breakpoint there.

The Control Palette lets you progress through your script
The Control Palette lets you progress through your script

You will see:

    In the centre, at the top, a Control Panel with buttons for controlling the debugger

The control panel
The control panel

    On the left, a pane with sections for VARIABLES, WATCH, CALL STACK LOADED SCRIPTS and BREAKPOINTS. For now, this just contains some house-keeping information about which file you are debugging. You’ll see a red dot and a checkbox at the bottom showing where your first breakpoint can be found. The checkbox indicates that it is active.

The Debug Pane on the left
The Debug Pane on the left

    In your script itself, the line with the breakpoint is highlighted, and there is a yellow pointer surrounding the breakpoint. This indicates that the debugger has stopped here, and has not yet executed this line.

The debugger is paused at the next line to be executed
The debugger is paused at the next line to be executed
Stepping through the script

    Click on the Step Over button in the Control Panel, or press the shortcut key F10.

The Step Over button in the Control Panel
The Step Over button in the Control Panel

    The first line of code will be executed. You will see that the variable length is now shown in the VARIABLES pane. The yellow pointer and highlight will move to the next line that is about to be executed.

When the first line is executed, length = 12 is shown in the VARIABLES pane
When the first line is executed, length = 12 is shown in the VARIABLES pane

    Press the Step Over button again or press F10. The while loop will see that length is truthy because it has a non-zero value, and it will move your code into its code block.

    Press the Step Over button again (F10), and the line console.log("Nail length: " + length) will be executed. You can see this output in the Debug Console panel, which replaces the Terminal.

Nail length: 12 is logged to the Debug Console
Nail length: 12 is logged to the Debug Console

    Press Step Over again. This time the line two things will happen:
        length = length - 1 will be executed and the value of the length variable in the VARIABLES pane will change
        The debugger will reach the end of the loop (identified by the closing curly brace (}), and will jump back to the beginning of the loop again.

length is updated, and the loop starts again
length is updated, and the loop starts again

Once again, the while statement finds that the value 11 is truthy, and the code inside the loop is visited again.
A conditional breakpoint

You can continue to press the Step Over button once for each line of code, but you can also tell the debugger to run through the loop until something is about to change. You can set a conditional breakpoint. A conditional breakpoint will pause the debugger only in certain conditions.

Here’s how to set a conditional breakpoint that will only pause the debugger when length has the value 1:

    In your script, Right-Click just to the left of line number 4.
    In the contextual menu that opens, choose Add Conditional Breakpoint

Right-click to add a conditional breakpoint
Right-click to add a conditional breakpoint

    An editable frame will open where you can type an expression. The debugger will pause at this breakpoint only if this expression is true. Type:

length === 1

TeX

This expression evaluates to true only if the value of the length variable is identical to the number 1.
Set the condition that will trigger the breakpoint
Set the condition that will trigger the breakpoint

    Click on the Continue button.

The Continue button in the Control Panel
The Continue button in the Control Panel

This will make the debugger run through every step automatically until it finds itself on line 4 and the the value of the length variable is identical to the number 1. Then it will pause.
Press Continue to run your code until the next breakpoint
Press Continue to run your code until the next breakpoint

You should see Nail length logged many times in the Debug Console, and an entry for length = 1 showing in the VARIABLES pane. The line length = length - 1 is ready to be executed.

    Use the F10 shortcut to activate the Step Over button and execute just this one line.

Activate Step Over to set length to 0
Activate Step Over to set length to 0

The entry length = 0 will appear in the VARIABLES pane, and the code will jump back to the beginning of the loop. This time, the while statement will see that length is 0, and 0 is falsy, so it will not move your code into its loop block. Instead, it will jump to the first line after the loop block.
When length === 0, the while loop will stop
When length === 0, the while loop will stop

    Use Step Over again, to execute the final line console.log("length:", length). One last entry will be printed in the Debug Console.

    Press the Step Over button again to execute the line after that… which doesn’t exist. This will make the debugger close.

The Control Panel will disappear, and so will the VARIABLES pane.
The end of the debugging session
The end of the debugging session
Just a trial session

There are no problems in the code in your while.js script. This debugging session just allowed you to see how the debugger works.

Now you know how to:

    Set a breakpoint
    Step through code one line at a time
    Set a conditional breakpoint
    Run through your code until the next breakpoint becomes active
    Watch how the value of your variables change at each step
    Watch how the code travels along different paths, depending on whether an expression is true or false.

In the future, when your code is not doing what you think it should be doing, you will be able to use these techniques to troubleshoot the problem, and find what needs to be fixed.
Drawing the Nail

So far, your main.js script simply prints out the rules and asks the human player if they want to start.
Your game so far
Your game so far

Now you have seen enough JavaScript to know how to draw a nail in the Terminal and indicate how long it is. Yes. You have. You even know how to delete the rules of the game and the question about who is going to start.

As Matt Parker explains, in a game with 12 tokens, the player who starts cannot win against someone (or something) that understands the logic of the game. So you can start by drawing a nail 12 units long, plus a flat head.
Can you draw a nail?

Can you edit your main.js script so that it draws a nail after the human player answers the question about who is going to start?

Here’s what you need to print to the Terminal, using console.log()
A nail drawn in ASCII art
A nail drawn in ASCII art

    Reopen the Terminal which is active on your Nail_It directory.

Need to change directory?

    Open main.js in VS Code’s text editor.

    Edit main.js.

    To test if your edits are working as you expect, in a Terminal open on your Nail_It directory, run:

    node main.js

    TeX

Hints

A simple solution

The simplest solution is just to replace the line console.log("player:", player) with the two lines highlighted below:

const readlineSync = require('readline-sync')
const whoStarts = `If you want to start, type Y.
If you want me to start press any other key. `

console.log(`Let's knock a nail into this computer!

* Each player takes a turn to hit the nail once.
* A player can hit the nail in one of three ways:
  gently, firmly, hard.
* Depending on the force used, the nail will be
  driven more or less deeply into the Terminal.
* The player who knocks the nail all the way in
  is the winner.

Are you ready?
`)

let player = readlineSync.keyInYN(whoStarts)

console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K'.repeat(14))
console.log("-" + "=".repeat(11) + "| The nail is 12 units long.")

JavaScript
A better solution, using variables

The solution below allows you to change the value of the length variable. Not only will the length of the nail change, but the text given its length in units will change at the same time.

All the strings are defined at together at the beginning of the script, and the interactive commands are placed together at the end.

const readlineSync = require('readline-sync')
const rules = `Let's knock a nail into this computer!

* Each player takes a turn to hit the nail once.
* A player can hit the nail in one of three ways:
  gently, firmly, hard.
* Depending on the force used, the nail will be
  driven more or less deeply into the Terminal.
* The player who knocks the nail all the way in
  is the winner.

Are you ready?
`
const whoStarts = `If you want to start, type Y.
If you want me to start press any other key. `
const nailIs    = "The nail is "
const long      = " units long."
const length    = 15
const toDelete  = 14
const nail      = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
const prompt    = nailIs + length + long

console.log(rules)
let player = readlineSync.keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log('\x1B[1A\x1B[K'.repeat(toDelete))
console.log(nail, prompt)

JavaScript

Try setting const length = 15 and run node main.js again. Do you see the advantage of using a variable to store the length?

Note that if you set const toDelete = 13 then not all of the rules will be deleted:

node main.js
Let's knock a nail into this computer!

-==============| The nail is 15 units long.

TeX
Playing Solo

Your game asks the human player if they want to start. But the AI is not ready to play yet, so, for the time being, you can get the human player to play solo.

Remember, back in section 16. A Few Words about true and false, you saw this if statement with two branches?

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  
} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  // TODO: choose the number between 1 and 3 to ensure AI wins
  // (if possible)
}

JavaScript

You can add this at the end of yourmain.js file, with a placeholder action to the else branch (where the human player chose not to start):

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  // TODO: ask the human player for a number between 1 and 3

} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  console.log(`The AI is not ready yet.
You'll have to play solo.`)
  player = true
  force = 0
}

JavaScript
Placeholder for AI

Question: What do you expect will happen if you run your script and press any key except Y?

Answer: The game will print the string in the Terminal. And stop.

node main.js

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.
The AI is not ready yet. You'll have to play solo.
james@M1 Nail_It % 

TeX

Note that, for now, the lines…

player = true
force = 0

JavaScript

… have no effect. (So why are they there? 🤔)

Until you have added real code for the AI, just remember to press Y each time you launch the game.
Ask the human player how hard to hit

You already know how to ask the human player how hard they plan to hit the nail. Where have you done this before?

Can you copy and paste the code that you wrote earlier into the the first branch of the if statement?
Hint

A copy and paste solution

The game logs your answer to the question, then stops

A more elegant solution

Refactoring Code

The “more elegant solution” given in the previous section is:

    Easier to read
    Easier to explain
    Easier to maintain

It’s good to have code that works. It’s better to keep your code well-organized. The process of tidying up code that is already working is called refactoring. You can read more about it here.

During refactoring, you don’t fix anything that is broken, you don’t add any new features, you just simplify the structure.

You should refactor your code regularly.
Dealing with errors

I’m now going to make you break your code. When you run it and choose how hard your are plan to hit the nail, the Terminal will fill up with information about an error. Actually, I will create a series of errors for you, and you can discover how to fix them, one by one.

Error messages might look alarming, but they are designed to be helpful. They are written by experienced developers who want to understand what mistakes they themselves have made, so they can see how to fix them.
Redraw the nail with a shorter length

The next step in your game is to show the nail with a shorter length because it has been hit by a virtual hammer.

The obvious way to do this would be to subtract the value returned by keyInSelect() from length. Or something like that.

    Add a new line at the end of your script, as shown below.

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)
  console.log(
    "index:", index,
    "strength:", strength[index]
  )
} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  console.log(`The AI is not ready yet.
You'll have to play solo.`)
  player = true
  force = 0
}

length = length - index

JavaScript

    Launch your game with node main.js
    Press Y
    Press 3, to hit the nail hard.

index is not defined

Here’s the error that you will see:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
index: 2 strength: hard
/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:51
length = length - index
                  ^

ReferenceError: index is not defined
    at Object.<anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:51:19)

TeX

In fact, there will be more information printed in the Terminal, but the key information is shown above.

“But…” I hear you say, “… index is defined. Right there on line 40. Look!”

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)
  console.log(
    "index:", index,
    "strength:", strength[index]
  )
} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  console.log(`The AI is not ready yet.
You'll have to play solo.`)
  player = true
  force = 0
}

length = length - index

JavaScript
Block scope

JavaScript sets up barriers between different blocks of code so that data in one block doesn’t interfere with data from another. It uses curly braces ({ ... }) to do this. Humans do something similar with walls and fences and hedges.
Fences and hedges to keep things safely in place
File:HausWildenrathGarten.jpg

CC BY-SA 3.0 by Bodoklecksel | source
Fences and hedges to keep things safely in place

For JavaScript, the index that is declared inside curly braces is accessible only inside those curly braces. This is due to a concept called scope. Any time a variable is declared inside curly braces, the world outside those curly braces cannot touch it. See MDN’s documentation for more details.

{ // it's the human player's turn
  const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)

JavaScript

// lines skipped //

}

JavaScript

// lines skipped //

length = length - index

JavaScript

It’s like when you call your mother “Mum” (or whatever you call her) within your family, everyone knows who you are talking about. But if you hear a stranger on the street use the same word, you know that they are talking about someone else. Within the scope of your family, “Mum” refers to a particular person. Outside the scope of your family, “Mum” means something different.

In the code above, the index on line 51 has not been declared using const or let or even var. So JavaScript gives you an error:

ReferenceError: index is not defined

TeX
Fixing the problem

To tell the truth, index does not hold the right number. As you saw in section 17. Choosing a Number, index refers to the position of the word "hard" inside the strength array, and positions in an array are counted starting from zero.

What you want is a number that is index + 1. Here’s how you can create a variable called force, using let, and give it the value index + 1

let force

console.log(rules)
let player = keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
console.log(nail, prompt)

if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
  const index = keyInSelect(strength, question);
  console.log(
    "index:", index,
    "strength:", strength[index]
  )
  force = index + 1

} else { // it's the AI's turn to play
  console.log(`The AI is not ready yet.
You'll have to play solo.`)
  player = true
  force = 0
}

length = length - force

JavaScript

Because you declare force using let outside the curly braces:

    You can change its value
    It is also available inside the curly braces

    Edit your main.js script to add the references to force, as shown above.
    Launch your game with node main.js
    Press Y
    Press 3, to hit the nail hard.

Assignment to constant variable

Now you get a new error:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
index: 2 strength: hard
/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:54
length = length - force
       ^

TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
    at Object.<anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:54:8)

TeX

This is my fault (but I did it on purpose). On line 22, I got you to declare length using const. This tells JavaScript that its value will never change.

const length    = 12

JavaScript

So, when on line 54, the script tries to set length to a different value…

length = length - force

JavaScript

… JavaScript complains.
Can you solve “Assignment to constant variable” error?

What small change can you make to your script so that the “Assignment to constant variable” error no longer occurs?
Solution

Solo challenges

If the AI is not ready to play yet, you can focus on creating an activity for a solo player. Below is a list of challenges for you.

I’ll treat each one in a separate section.
1. After the nail is hit, can you show it at its new length?

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
-========|

TeX
2. Can you show how hard the solo player chose to hit the nail?

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 2
-=========| You hit the nail firmly.

TeX
3. Can you remove the question after it has been answered?

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-==========| You hit the nail gently.

TeX
4. Can you let the solo player hit the nail several times in a row?

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-========| You hit the nail hard.

-======| You hit the nail firmly.

-=====| You hit the nail gently.

-===| You hit the nail firmly.

-| You hit the nail hard.

TeX
5. Can you show the winning situation… even if the solo player hits the nail too hard the last time?

-===========|  The nail is 12 units long.

-==========|  You hit the nail gently.

-========|  You hit the nail firmly.

-=====|  You hit the nail hard.

-===|  You hit the nail firmly.

-==|  You hit the nail gently.

-|  You hit the nail firmly.

| You hit the nail hard.

You win!

TeX
6. Can you show the point of the nail only at the start of the game?

-===========|  The nail is 12 units long.

=========|  You hit the nail hard.

=======|  You hit the nail firmly.

====|  You hit the nail hard.

==|  You hit the nail firmly.

=|  You hit the nail gently.

| You hit the nail firmly.

You win!

TeX
7. Can you align all the text nicely?

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

==========|   You hit the nail firmly.

=========|    You hit the nail gently.

=======|      You hit the nail firmly.

====|         You hit the nail hard.

==|           You hit the nail firmly.

=|            You hit the nail gently.

|             You hit the nail firmly.

You win!

TeX
8. Can you give the nail a different length each time?

For example:

-===========| The nail is 15 units long.

TeX
9. Can you stop the game early, before there is a winner?

If the human player presses 0 when asked how hard to hit, can you make the game end gracefully?

-==============| The nail is 15 units long.

============|    You hit the nail hard.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]:  0

Thanks for playing!

TeX
Redrawing the Nail
#1 <After the nail is hit, can you show it at its new length?

Here’s what you need to print in the Terminal:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
-========|

TeX
Hints

Solution

Tips for Solving the Challenges

As you saw in the last section 27. Redrawing the Nail, each challenge has three parts:

    The task to complete
    Hints on how to think about solving it
    The complete code of the game with the solution included

The changes are just a few lines each time, but they might be in different places in the code.
Tip
You won’t learn much if you simply copy and paste the (changed lines of) code.

If you get stuck, a better approach is to:

    Study the changed lines of code in the Solution
    Hide the solution
    Edit your own code from memory

If you understand how the changed lines work, it should be easy to reproduce them.
Tip
If you don’t understand the changed lines, do some research.

There are different ways to do this:

    In your browser, create a query for js ... followed by the keywords in the code that you don’t understand
    Add a breakpoint to your code, open your debugger and step through the code line by line
        Watch how the value of variables change in the VARIABLES panel
        Use the WATCH pane to check the value of longer expressions
        Check which path your code takes through an if ... else ... statement
        Check if the value of the expression in any while (expression) { ... } statements is still true

Tip
If you think you have correctly altered your code, but it doesn’t work as expected, compare your code with mine.

    Open the Solution
    Use the Copy button at the top left of a code listing to copy the complete code

There’s a Copy button at the top left of every code listing
There’s a Copy button at the top left of every code listing

    Open your main.js file in VS code
    Press the F1 key on your keyboard (or Ctrl-Shift-P) to open the Command Palette
    Start typing the beginning of the text Compare Active File with Clipboard

Select Compare Active File with Clipboard in the Command Palette
Select Compare Active File with Clipboard in the Command Palette

    A new document will open called Clipboard ⇔ main.js. Depending on the width your VS Code window, the differences may be shown inline…
    Inline differences
    Inline differences

    … or side-by-side:
    Side-by-side differences
    Side-by-side differences

Tip
Embrace your mistakes

If you get everything right the first time, then your brain has not had to work very hard, so it’s not going to make the effort to remember.

If you make a mistake, you will feel some kind of emotion. Your memory is triggered by emotions. After you fix the mistake, your memory will store your experience for later, so that you can avoid these emotions later.

In other words: making mistakes is one of the keys to learning.
How Hard the Nail was Hit
#2 Can you show how hard the solo player chose to hit the nail?

Here’s what the Terminal should show when you have finished this challenge:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 2
-=========| You hit the nail firmly

TeX
Hints:

Solution

Removing the Question
#3 Can you remove the question after it has been answered?

The Terminal would look better if the question were removed, and just the result of answering the question were shown.

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-==========| You hit the nail gently.

TeX
Hints

Solution

Hitting More Than Once
#4 Can you let the solo player hit the nail several times in a row?

This challenge is more tricky. I expect that you will see a number of errors as you work on it, so I will walk you through it. Fixing these errors will also resolve the WET issue (We Enjoy Typing - the opposite of DRY).

Here’s the display in the Terminal that you are aiming for:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-========| You hit the nail hard.

-======| You hit the nail firmly.

-=====| You hit the nail gently.

-===| You hit the nail firmly.

-| You hit the nail hard.

TeX
Repetition with while

In section 20: Never Repeat a Trick, you wrote a script called while.js, which logged Nail length: from 12 down to 1.

let length = 12
while (length) {
  console.log("Nail length: " + length)
  length = length - 1
}
console.log("length:", length)

JavaScript

You can use a similar technique here.

    In main.js, you can wrap the if statement that checks if the player is human or AI in a while loop:

console.log(rules)
let player = keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
console.log(nail, prompt)

while (length) {
  if (player) { // it's the human player's turn
    const index = keyInSelect(strength, question)
    force = index + 1
    prompt = hit + strength[index] + "."
    toDelete = 7
  } else { // it's the AI's turn to play
    console.log(`The AI is not ready yet.
  You'll have to play solo.`)
    player = true
    force = 0
  }

  length = length - force
  nail   = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
  console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
  console.log(nail, prompt)
}

JavaScript

    In the Terminal, run:

node main.js

TeX

    Press Y to choose to start.
    Press a number from 1 to 3 each time you are asked.

To begin with, all will be well, but finally you will get an error:
Invalid count value: -1

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-========| You hit the nail hard.

-======| You hit the nail firmly.

-=====| You hit the nail gently.

-===| You hit the nail firmly.

-| You hit the nail hard.

/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:56
  nail      = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
                        ^

RangeError: Invalid count value: -1
    at String.repeat (<anonymous>)
    at Object.<anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:56:25)

TeX
The debugger to the rescue!

It might be helpful to use VS Code’s debugger to see what the problem is.

    Press the F5 shortcut (or use the menu item Run > Start Debugging if you have the time, and no-one’s looking)
    As before, select Node.js in the Command Palette when asked which language you want to debug.

Select the debugger for Node.js
Select the debugger for Node.js

    Open the Debug Console.
    Yikes!

The current environment doesn’t support interactive reading from TTY
The current environment doesn’t support interactive reading from TTY

Here’s an extract of the error message. It shows that the error occurred on line 38 of main.js.
environment doesn’t support interactive reading from TTY

opt/homebrew/bin/node ./main.js
Let's knock a nail into this computer!

* Each player takes a turn to hit the nail once.
* A player can hit the nail in one of three ways:
  gently, firmly, hard.
* Depending on the force used, the nail will be
  driven more or less deeply into the Terminal.
* The player who knocks the nail all the way in
  is the winner.

Are you ready?

Process exited with code 1
Uncaught Error Error: The current environment doesn't support interactive reading from TTY.
stty: /dev/tty: Device not configured
/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/node_modules/readline-sync/lib/read.sh: line 49: /dev/tty: Device not configured
stty: /dev/tty: Device not configured
    at readlineExt (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/node_modules/readline-sync/lib/readline-sync.js:221:19)

TeX

  # lines skipped #

    at <anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:38:14)

TeX

Here is line 38 of main.js:

let player = keyInYN(whoStarts)

JavaScript

This is the line where readline-sync is used for the first time.

In other words, the error occurred because VS Code’s debugger doesn’t work with readline-sync.

The debugger is designed to work with Node.js and JavaScript. readline-sync interacts with the Terminal. Out of the box, they are incompatible.

But you can guess that if I suggested that you use the debugger, there will be a solution. The question is: How to find the solution.

Google is your friend. The problem you have just met is due to the interaction between three things: VS Code, readline-sync and the debugger. Here’s a Google query for exactly these three things:

vs code readline-sync debugger

    Click on the link above.

Using Google to search for solutions
Using Google to search for solutions

In my browser, the first link that Google gives is to a question on stackoverflow.com.
stackoverflow.com

stackoverflow.com is a site where developers of all levels, using every imaginable coding language can ask questions and get answers.

Most questions that you may have will already have been asked and answered, so you should search for existing answers before you ask a question of your own.

The site is gamified. You earn points for asking good questions, you earn points for giving good answers. But you can also lose points if your question is badly written, or shows that you haven’t even tried to find a solution for yourself, or if it has already been asked many times.

Good answers get upvoted. You can see how many points the person who answered the question has earned. You can easily see which answers you can trust.

If I visit this stackoverflow link, I find that the question does not exactly match my problem. But I’m interested in answers.

    Scroll down until you find Muneeb’s answer

Muneeb’s answer
Muneeb’s answer

“Well that’s very nice. An answer with 10 reputation poinst,” you think. “But what’s a launch.json file? And where do I put this line "console": "integratedTerminal"?”

    Look at the VS Code window where your error is showing.
    Make sure the Run panel is showing (menu View > Run, Shift-Ctrl-D (for Debug), or click on the Run and Debug icon).

The ‘create a launch.json file’ link
The ‘create a launch.json file’ link

    Look for the link to create a launch.json file, and click on it.

Composite image: creating the launch.json file
Composite image: creating the launch.json file

VS Code will create a new file at Nail_It/.vscode/launch.json. This will tell VS Code that, in the future, when you run the debugger, you want node to launch the file at "${workspaceFolder}/main.js" and not to bother you with any code written in node_internals.

This is the file where you can add the line "console": "integratedTerminal":

{
  // Use IntelliSense to learn about possible attributes.
  // Hover to view descriptions of existing attributes.
  // For more information, visit: https://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?linkid=830387
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    
    {
      "type": "node",
      "request": "launch",
      "name": "Launch Program",
      "skipFiles": [
        "<node_internals>/**"
      ],
      "program": "${workspaceFolder}/main.js",
      "console": "integratedTerminal"
    }
  ]
}

JSON

    Add the line suggested by Muneeb to your new launch.json file.
    Be sure to place a comma (,) at the end of the previous line.
    Press F5 again, to start the debugger.

The debugger doesn’t complain now
The debugger doesn’t complain now

This time everything works fine. The Terminal explains to you how helpful it is being, and then it runs your script.
Add a breakpoint

The debugger might not want to let you add a breakpoint while it is running.

    Stop the debugger by pressing Shift-F5, or clicking on the little red square in the Control Panel.

The Stop button in the Control Panel
The Stop button in the Control Panel

    Check the first error you got, before you ran the debugger, to see where the error occurred:

RangeError: Invalid count value: -1
    at String.repeat (<anonymous>)
    at Object.<anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:56:25)

TeX

    Put a debug breakpoint on line 56 of your main.js script:

Add a breakpoint to line 56
Add a breakpoint to line 56

    Press the F5 key to start debugging.

Your game will ask you to press Y and then choose a number from 1 - 3.

    Press 3 on your keyboard.

The debugger will stop on line 56, before it executes that line.
Going through first pass off the while loop with the debugger
Going through first pass off the while loop with the debugger

You can see that the value of force has been set to 3, and that length has been updated to 9. The value of nail is still exactly what you code calculated on line 33. The nail is still 12 units long.

    Click on the Step Over button in the Command Palette, or press the F10 shortcut.

The value for nail is updated when you activate Step Over
The value for nail is updated when you activate Step Over

JavaScript has no problem creating a new string for nail.

    Activate Step Over two more times.

The question is cleared and the nail is redrawn
The question is cleared and the nail is redrawn

Three things will happen:

    The question will be cleared from the Terminal
    A new, shorter version of the nail will be drawn
    The debugger will jump back to the beginning of the while loop

    Activate Step Over three more times. The debugger will step back into the while loop, because length is 9 and non-zero numbers are truthy. But on the third step, the debugger will stop showing which line is about to be executed and it will stop showing any variables.

The debugger takes a break while readline-sync is active
The debugger takes a break while readline-sync is active

This is because the keyInSelect() method of readline-sync has taken control. It’s busy listening for your input in the Terminal.

    Click on the Terminal to activate it
    On your keyboard, press a number from 1 - 3.

The debugger becomes active again after keyInSelect() returns a value
The debugger becomes active again after keyInSelect() returns a value

The debugger becomes active again.

Note that there is an entry for index in the Block section of the VARIABLES pane. (The value this is there for house-keeping reasons.)

    Press the Continue button in the Control Panel, or press the shortcut key F5.

The debugger will jump directly to line 56, executing all the code on the way.

    In the WATCH panel, click on the + button and enter the expression length - 1.

Using the WATCH panel to watch the value of an expression
Using the WATCH panel to watch the value of an expression

You should see that its value is 5. Again, JavaScript will have no problem creating a new string for nail.

    Press F5 to make your script continue running.
    Activate the Terminal, and press the 3 key on your keyboard
    Repeat steps 13 and 14 again.

Now you can see the problem. In the WATCH panel, you can see that length - 1 = -1. The string method .repeat() can’t handle negative numbers.
Debugging the while loop
Debugging the while loop
Where has index gone?

In the VARIABLES pane of the debugger, there is no entry for index. Why not?

The debugger is paused on line 56, which is outside the curly-bracket code block where index is declared. At this point in the code JavaScript and the debugger have forgotten that index ever existed.

    Just for closure, activate Step Over one last time.

Your game exits with an error
Your game exits with an error
How to fix this?

The debugger disconnects and JavaScript shows the same error it gave you before:

Invalid count value: -1 ... /Nail_It/main.js:56:25

Bash

This is the problem that you are going to have to fix, but the debugger has shown you how and where the error occurs.

Remember how I pointed out that there were problems with repeated lines of code? In the next section, you’ll see how to make your code work without them.
Fixing the Problem with the while Loop

When length reaches 0, the expression length - 1 takes on the value -1. And the string method .repeat() can’t handle negative numbers. If you hit the nail too hard the last time, then length itself can become negative.

So you need to make sure that the calculation for nail never happens after length has been reduced to 0 or less.
length is tested at the beginning of each loop

In your current code, line 55 changes the value of length inside the while loop, and line 56 uses this new value.

length = length - force
nail   = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"

JavaScript

Before the while loop even starts, your code calculates and prints a value for nail:

let nail     = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
let prompt   = nailIs + length + long
let force

console.log(rules)
let player = keyInYN(whoStarts)
console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
console.log(nail, prompt)

JavaScript
What if you put these earlier lines inside the while loop?

If you move the earlier lines that clear the Terminal and draw the nail inside the while loop, you don’t need to repeat them at the end of the loop.

If length gets set to 0 inside the while loop, it will just not run again. The value of length - 1 can never become negative. (SPOILER: Or can it?)

let toDelete = 14
let length   = 12
let prompt   = nailIs + length + long
let nail
let force

console.log(rules)
let player = keyInYN(whoStarts)

while (length) {
  console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
  nail = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
  console.log(nail, prompt)

JavaScript

// lines skipped //

  length = length - force
  


  


  


}

JavaScript
The fix: first attempt

    Edit your main.js script to remove lines 56 - 58, and to adjust the code, as shown in the listing above.
    Run

node main.js

Bash

    Press Y
    Press the 3 key on your keyboard every time you are asked how hard you want to hit. If all goes well, your Terminal should look like this:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-========| You hit the nail hard.

-=====| You hit the nail hard.

-==| You hit the nail hard.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
james@M1 Nail_It % 

TeX

Your game stops when length becomes 0, and the result of your last strike is not shown.
Showing that the fix is broken

    Repeat steps 1 - 3 above,
    Press 2 the first time you are asked how hard you want to hit
    Press 3 every other time.

It seems that the length - 1 error is still present.
Invalid count value: -3

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

-=========| You hit the nail firmly.

-======| You hit the nail hard.

-===| You hit the nail hard.

-| You hit the nail hard.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 3
/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:41
  nail   = "-" + "=".repeat(length - 1) + "|"
                     ^

RangeError: Invalid count value: -3
    at String.repeat (<anonymous>)
    at Object.<anonymous> (/path/to/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js:41:22)

TeX
Troubleshooting with the debugger

    In main.js, remove the existing breakpoint
    Add a conditional breakpoint on line 41:

Add a breakpoint on line 41
Add a breakpoint on line 41

    Give it the condition length < 0. This will become true if length becomes -1, -2 or any other negative value

    Start the debugger.

    In the Terminal, press Y when asked

    As before, press 2 the first time you are asked how hard you want to hit

    Press 3 every other time.

length can become negative
length can become negative

When length is reduced to 1, and you press the 3 key, length - force evaluates to -2.
Negative numbers are truthy

In section 16. A Few Words about true and false, I wrote:

    JavaScript treats the number 0, the empty string "" and a few other empty values as false. These values are said to be falsy.

    Conversely, JavaScript treats anything that is not false or 0 or empty as true… even the word "false", because "false" contains letters, so it’s not empty. Anything that is not false or falsy is truthy.

As you have just discovered, negative numbers are neither 0 nor false, so JavaScript treats them as truthy. If you want the while loop to stop when the value for length is 0 or less, you need to change the condition, to while (length > 0), which you can read as "whilelength` is greater than zero”.
Can you fix it yourself?

Can you fix this issue yourself?

Hint: You only need to add four characters to main.js (and two of them are optional spaces).
Solution

DRY code is good

This problem was created because the same lines of code were being executed in two different places. The original code broke the Don’t Repeat Yourself principle.

The problem was solved by rethinking the code so that no repetition was necessary.

At the very end of this guide, you will discover functions, which are reusable blocks of code where you can create functionality that you write in one place, and can use from many different places.
Showing the Winning Situation
#5 Can you show the winning situation?

In the last challenge, your code stopped working when length was reduced to 0 or less.

Now can you add some code after the end of the while loop that will show the final state and declare the human player the winner?

Below you can see how the Terminal might look when you have completed this challenge. Note that the final hit can be stronger than necessary.

-===========|  The nail is 12 units long.

-==========|  You hit the nail gently.

-========|  You hit the nail firmly.

-=====|  You hit the nail hard.

-===|  You hit the nail firmly.

-==|  You hit the nail gently.

-|  You hit the nail firmly.

| You hit the nail hard.

You win!

TeX
Hints

Solution

Don’t Show the Point of the Nail
#6. Can you show the point of the nail only at the start?

-===========|  The nail is 12 units long.

=========|  You hit the nail hard.

=======|  You hit the nail firmly.

====|  You hit the nail hard.

==|  You hit the nail firmly.

=|  You hit the nail gently.

| You hit the nail firmly.

You win!

TeX
Hints

Solution

Align the Text Nicely
#7 Can you align all the text nicely?

Here’s how the Terminal should look when you have completed this challenge:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

==========|   You hit the nail firmly.

=========|    You hit the nail gently.

=======|      You hit the nail firmly.

====|         You hit the nail hard.

==|           You hit the nail firmly.

=|            You hit the nail gently.

|             You hit the nail firmly.

You win!

TeX
Hints

Almost a solution

To fix the bug in the solution above, you’re going to have to find a way to reduce the value of force to just the right amount to drive the nail home. Here’s a Google query that might lead you in the right direction: js find minimum. <<< Click on it to see where it leads you.
Fix the bug

js, or searching online for “JavaScript”

In the Google search query I used above, I wrote js and not JavaScript. There are many many JavaScript programmers who work for search-engine companies, and they all like to type as little as possible. As a result, their algorithms understand that the extension js refers to JavaScript, and you don’t have to type the full name each time you make a query.
Nails with Random Lengths
#8 Can you give the nail a different length each time?

Can you choose a nail length in the range 12 - 15 units, to make the game more interesting (when the AI starts to play)? For example:

-===========| The nail is 15 units long.

TeX
Math.random()

If you search on Google for js random number, you can find a link to MDN’s article on Math.random(). This includes a Try it demo
Click on the Run button to see new random numbers each time
Click on the Run button to see new random numbers each time

There are three things to note here:

    Math.random() gives a number in the range between 0 and almost 1. It will never return the value 1.
    If you multiply this number-between-0-and-almost-1 by any number, you will get a number between 0 and almost the number you multiplied by.
    Math.floor() takes a number and returns the next lowest integer. So 1.999 becomes 1, and so does 1.001

Using these three ideas together, you can create an integer (whole number) which is in the range 0 to n - 1, where n is the number that you multiply Math.random() by.
Try in the Node IDE

To get a number between 12 and 15, you could use:

12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4))

JavaScript

    In a new Terminal window, open the Node Interactive Development Environment (IDE) by typing:

node

TeX

    Enter the expression 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4) and press Enter

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
13

TeX

The IDE will give you an number between 12 and 15 (or 12 + (4-1)).

    Press the Up Arrow on your keyboard to show the expression again, and press Enter.
    Repeat step 3 many times.

You should get a different value most times, but sometimes you’ll get the same value twice. That’s how random it is.

> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
14
> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
14
> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
15
> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
15
> 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
12

TeX

You can try other expressions with Math.random() and Math.floor(), to see how they work together and separately.
Choose a random nail length
Hint

Solution

What if the Human Player Presses 0?

By default, readline-sync.keyInSelect() considers that pressing 0 means CANCEL. But your game doesn’t cancel anything.

If you press the 0 key now, the game will behave a little strangely. It will not make the nail any shorter, and it will show the string undefined instead of gently, firmly or hard. And it will continue to ask you to play.

-=============| The nail is 14 units long.

==============| You hit the nail undefined.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 

TeX
Where does undefined come from?

Back in section 18. Arrays and index Zero, you saw that the first item in an array is at index 0. You saw that you could get the value at each entry in the array, by counting from 0 to the-number-of-items-in-the-array minus 1.

Here’s how you can check this in the Node IDE in your Terminal:

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> s = [ 'gently', 'firmly', 'hard' ]
[ 'gently', 'firmly', 'hard' ]
> s[0]
'gently'
> s[1]
'firmly'
> s[2]
'hard'

TeX

Now try using index values that are out of range: greater than 2 or less than 0. You will get the value undefined:

> s[3]
undefined
> s[-1]
undefined

TeX

JavaScript looks for a value at the given place in the array, but there’s nothing there. In JavaScript-speak, this “nothing” is undefined. When you add this nothing to a string, it appears as the string "undefined", but it’s not a string.

You can create undefined in different ways

    If you ask for an item in an array that doesn’t exist (as you gave just don.)
    If you don’t give any value to a variable that you create with let, its value will be undefined

> let empty
undefined

TeX

    If you ask an object for a property that it doesn’t have:

> r = require("readline-sync")
{
  _DBG_set_useExt: [Function (anonymous)],

TeX

// lines skipped //

  question: [Function (anonymous)],
  prompt: [Function (anonymous)],
  keyIn: [Function (anonymous)],

TeX

// lines skipped //

}
> r.unknownProperty
undefined

TeX

    If you call a method that does not return any value:

console.log("This text will be followed by `undefined` because the method console.log() does not return a value")
This text will be followed by `undefined` because the method console.log() does not return a value
undefined

TeX
undefined is falsy

As mentioned earlier, JavaScript treats the value undefined as if it were false.
Stopping the game when you press 0

When the AI starts playing (and making mistakes), there will be times when you are testing the game that you will want to stop the game and make a change to the code. Right now, you are forced to play all the way through to the end.

As you have seen, when you press 0, keyInSelect() returns the value -1.

In the next section, you’ll see how to stop the game if the value return by keyInSelect() is less than 1.
process and process exit()

When you run a script using node in the Terminal, NodeJS creates an object called process, which contains all properties and methods that let it do its job.

One of these methods is exit(), which will allow you to stop the script from running. A property that you will probably use in future projects is argv, which is an array describing which version of node is running, which file it is running, and any more text you may have typed after node main.js in the Terminal.
What process looks like

Here’s how you can see what process looks like. (Your values for version and argv may be different.)

    Add these two lines at the very beginning of your main.js script. (This is only temporary. You will remove them very soon.)

    console.log(process)
    process.exit()

    const {
      keyInYN,
      keyInSelect
    } = require('readline-sync')

    const rules = `Let's knock a nail into this computer!

JavaScript

    // All the other lines skipped //

    In the Terminal, run:

node main.js

TeX

    In the Terminal, you should see over 800 lines of data printed. I have just given you the highlights below:

process {
  version: 'v23.1.0',
  versions: {
    node: '23.1.0',
    acorn: '8.12.1',

Bash

// many lines skipped //

    zlib: '1.2.12'
  },

Bash

// many lines skipped //

  kill: [Function: kill],
  exit: [Function: exit],
  finalization: [Getter/Setter],

Bash

// many lines skipped //

  title: 'node',
  argv: [
    '/opt/homebrew/Cellar/node/23.1.0_1/bin/node',
    '/Users/james/My Learning Journey/Nail_It/main.js'
  ],
  execArgv: [],

Bash

// many lines skipped //

  [Symbol(shapeMode)]: false,
  [Symbol(kCapture)]: false
}

Bash
process.exit() stops the script

Did you see how the line process.exit() prevented the rest of your script from running?

Can you imagine how you will use this to stop the game if the human player presses 0 for the force for hitting the nail?

OK? That was too much information?

    You can delete these two lines from the beginning of your script, now that you know about process.exit().

   


   

JavaScript

   const {
     keyInYN,
     keyInSelect
   } = require('readline-sync')
   
   const rules = `Let's knock a nail into this computer!

JavaScript

// And your script continues //

Stopping the Game
#9 Can you stop the game early, before there is a winner?

If the human player presses 0 when asked how hard to hit, can you make the game end gracefully?

-==============| The nail is 15 units long.

============|    You hit the nail hard.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]:  0

Thanks for playing!

TeX
Hints

Solution

The AI’s Secret Weapon

Now it’s time to make your AI player as smart as the piece of plastic in Matt Parker’s video.

Both you and the AI can choose a force that reduces the length of the nail by between 1 and 3 units. If the number of units left is a multiple of 4, the player whose turn it is to play is in a losing position. If the current player takes n units, their opponent can take (4 - n) units, and the number of units left will still be a multiple of four.

In other words, the AI will have to:

    Look at the current length
    Divide it into groups of 4 units
    Check if there are any units left over

For example: If the nail is 11 units long, this is (2 x 4 = 8) + 3. There will be 3 units left after dividing into groups of 4.

There are mathematical terms I could use like modulo or remainder, but let’s imagine that my schooldays are a long time ago, and that I have forgotten these words. Here’s a Google query that uses words that I do know:

js find number left over after divide

When I click on this link, the first result comes from the trusty MDN documentation: Remainder (%). To quote this page:

    The remainder (%) operator returns the remainder left over when one operand is divided by a second operand. It always takes the sign of the dividend.

There is also a Try It section, where you can edit the values given in the code, and then press the Run button to see the results.
Calculating % 4 (modulo four), for different lengths of nail
Calculating % 4 (modulo four), for different lengths of nail
Testing in the Node IDE

You can also run your own tests in the Node IDE in the Terminal.

    Open a new Terminal and type node (or return to the Terminal where the Node IDE is already running)
    Type expressions like 13 % 4 in the Terminal, and then press Enter

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> 13 % 4
1
> 

TeX

You don’t need to type console.log(). The IDE will automatically print out the value of the expressions you type in. It may even not wait until you press Enter before showing you the value.
Implementing the AI’s strategy

So the modulo (%) operator is the AI’s secret weapon. As with the solo player, building the AI’s strategy is going to take several steps. Some of them are going to break the existing game.
Getting the AI to Win

Just as with the Solo Challenges, I’ll get you to apply the AI’s winning strategy little by little, one challenge at a time, and I’ll treat each challenge in a separate section.

Here’s a list of challenges:
1. Get the AI to join the game at all

Right now, if you do not press Y when asked if you want to start the game… well, you have to start the game anyway. To begin with, the AI will simply say something and do nothing.

-=============| The nail is 14 units long.

============|   You hit the nail firmly.
Say that again? I won't play yet.

============|   You hit the nail firmly.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 

TeX
2. Get the AI to play a move, and claim it

This means that you’ll have to change the string You hit the nail to something more generic.

-============| The nail is 13 units long.

==========|    You hit the nail gently.

=========|     I hit the nail gently.

TeX
3. Get the AI to play the best legal move

The AI must choose a value for force between 1 and 3, so it can’t always choose to play length % 4.

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

===========|  I hit the nail gently.

=========|    You hit the nail firmly.

========|     I hit the nail gently.

=====|        You hit the nail hard.

====|         I hit the nail gently.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 

TeX

Now the AI is in a winning position.
4. Get the AI to claim victory, when it wins

-==============| The nail is 15 units long.

============|    I hit the nail hard.

===========|     You hit the nail gently.

========|        I hit the nail hard.

=======|         You hit the nail gently.

====|            I hit the nail hard.

===|             You hit the nail gently.

|                I hit the nail hard.

I win!

TeX
5. Get the AI to invite you to play again

=|            You hit the nail hard.

|             I hit the nail gently.

I win!

Do you want to play again?
(Type Y for Yes, N for No): 

TeX
Get the AI to Join the Game
#1 Can you get the AI to join the game at all?

For now, the AI just lets you play. Can you make it print something into the Terminal to show that it exists? The simplest solution is to simply jump back to the beginning of the while loop after the AI’s turn, which means that these lines will be executed a second time:

  console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
  console.log(nail, prompt)

JavaScript

The output you are looking for could be something like this:


-=============| The nail is 14 units long.

============|   You hit the nail firmly.
Say that again? I won't play yet.

============|   You hit the nail firmly.

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 

TeX
Hints

Solution

Get AI to Play a Move
#2 Can you get the AI to play a move, and claim it as its own?

Before, only the human player was playing, so you could use the fixed phrase You hit the nail, and then add gently or firmly or hard after it. Now you’ll need to get the the AI to say I  hit the nail ....

-============| The nail is 13 units long.

==========|    You hit the nail gently.

=========|     I hit the nail gently.

TeX
Coercion

You’ve already seen that JavaScript allows you to use truthy values like 12 to act as if they were true. You’ve heard that 0 will behave like false.

JavaScript uses a process called coercion when you try to combine values of two different types (like Boolean true or false) and numbers. Using coercion, JavaScript will convert one of the types into the other.
Turn false into 0

Here’s a trick for you to try in the Node IDE, to turn false into 0 and true into 1:

    In a new Terminal, type node

node
Welcome to Node.js v23.1.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> false + 0
0
> true + 0
1

TeX

And just for fun:

> true + false
1

TeX
Coercing numbers and strings

Sometimes coercion has unexpected consequences. Try this in the Node IDE:

> 4 + "2"
'42'
> 4 - "2"
2

TeX

This happens because + can be use as a string concatenation operator, and so that’s how JavaScript decides to use it. The - operator is only used with numbers, so the string “2” is coerced to a number before the operation.
Using an array to get the current player’s pronoun

You could create an array with the different pronouns that your game needs: “I” for the AI, “You” for the human player that the AI is talking to.

const players = [ "I", "You" ]

JavaScript

Now, player will have the value true or false. And players[0] will be “I”, while player[1] will be “You”.
Using players and player, coerced with 0

Can you see how to use the ideas describe above to get the right pronoun for the current player?
Solution

Hints for solving the main challenge


Solution to the main challenge

Get AI to Play the Best Legal Move

As Matt Parker explains, the winning strategy is to leave a multiple of 4 units when you complete your turn.

It will always play only one marble if it is in a losing position. This is a good strategy when playing against a human who doesn’t understand the system, because the human has more marbles to make a mistake with. It’s certainly the easiest strategy for a piece of plastic to use.
#3 Get the AI to play the best legal move

The AI must choose a value for force between 1 and 3, but it can’t always choose to play length % 4. If length % 4 is 0, you can make the AI hit the nail gently, so that it only becomes one unit shorter.

Here the AI starts in a losing position, so it plays gently:

-===========| The nail is 12 units long.

===========|  I hit the nail gently.

TeX

But if the human player makes a mistake, the AI seizes the opportunity to win.

==========|    You hit the nail gently.

========|     I hit the nail firmly.

TeX

After the AI’s turn, the number of units left is a multiple of four. Whatever the human player does, the AI can play to restore a multiple of four:

=====|        You hit the nail hard.

====|         I hit the nail gently.

TeX

After any move the human player can make, the AI is going to win:

[1] gently
[2] firmly
[3] hard
[0] CANCEL

How hard do you plan to hit? [1, 2, 3, 0]: 

TeX
Hints

Solution

Get AI to Play an Interesting Move
#3.1 Can you make the AI play randomly when it is stuck?

If the AI always hits gently when it is in a losing position, the human player might learn that always hitting hard can sometimes lead to victory.

You can make your code a little bit smarter than a piece of plastic. You can make the AI choose a random value for force if it finds itself in a losing position. This means that even a human player who knows the winning strategy will have to pay attention on each turn.
Hints

Solution

Get AI to Claim Victory
#4 Can you make the AI claim victory when it wins?

Currently, when the game is over, the last line that is printed in the Terminal is “You win!”, even if the AI was the real winner.

Your challenge here is to get the AI to print “I win!” when it beats you:

====|            I hit the nail hard.

===|             You hit the nail gently.

|                I hit the nail hard.

I win!

TeX
Hints

Solution

Get the AI to Offer to Play Again
#5 Get your friends to lose constantly against your game

If your friends play this game once and lose, they might just say “Cool game, bro!” and move on to something else. If the game offers them a chance for revenge, they might continue playing.

Here’s how your Terminal should look after you complete this last challenge:

=|            You hit the nail hard.

|             I hit the nail gently.

I win!

Do you want to play again?
(Type Y for Yes, N for No): 

TeX
A more complicated challenge

This challenge is not so easy, so I won’t hide the hints. I’ll walk you through it step by step.
keyInYNStrict()

You’ve already used readline-sync’s method keyInYNS(). This returns true if the player presses the Y key and falsy value if they press any other. This is fine for starting the game. The game will start whatever key the player chooses to press.

When you ask if the player wants to end the game, you don’t want the game to stop unexpectedly. You want to make sure that the player explicitly presses the N key to bring the game to an end.

readline-sync provides another method, keyInYNStrict(), which does just this.

You’ll have to require this new method explicitly at the beginning of your script:

const {
  keyInYN,
  keyInSelect,
  keyInYNStrict
} = require('readline-sync')

JavaScript
The options object

Back in section 15. Working with keyInYN, you did some tests with the options object.

The object looks like this:

const options   = { guide: false }

JavaScript

If you use it with keyInYN() or keyInYNStrict(), it hides the default text [y/n] that readline-sync wants to show. It makes your game look neater.

let player = keyInYN(whoStarts, options)

JavaScript
A string invitation to play again

You’ll need to create a variable to contain the string that you will print in the Terminal when the game is over. You could do something like this:

const replay = `
Do you want to play again?
(Type Y for Yes, N for No): `

JavaScript
Alternating players

If the same player starts each time, the game is not so interesting. When the game first begins, you can declare a variable with let which indicates who will start first next time:

let player = keyInYN(whoStarts, options)
let nextPlayer = !player

JavaScript
A second while loop

You’ll need to wrap your current game inside a second while loop. If you create a variable called playing, you can keep looping in the outer loop so long as playing is true. Here’s a simplified version of how this can work.

let playing   = true

while (playing) {
  // Initialize a new game

  while (length > 0) {   
    // Your current game goes here
  }

  // Somebody won. Ask the player if they want to play again
  playing    = keyInYNStrict(replay, options)

JavaScript
Initializing a new game

The code that you currently use to set up the game will need to be inside the while (playing) { } loop, so that a new game is created each time.

while (playing) {
  const initial = 12 + Math.floor(Math.random() * 4)
  let length    = initial
  let prompt    = nailIs + length + long
  let started   = false

  while (length > 0) {

JavaScript

// Your current code goes here //

  }

JavaScript

// Preparing to play again //

}

JavaScript
When someone wins

After the game declares the winner of the current game, you will need to:

    Ensure that play alternates between the players
    Prepare to clear the old game if a new game starts
    Ask if the player if they want to play again
    Print a farewell message if they decide to quit.

  console.log(clear.repeat(toDelete))
  console.log("|", prompt)
  console.log(winner[player + 0])

  // Get ready to play again, alternating between
  // player and AI
  player     = nextPlayer
  nextPlayer = !nextPlayer

  // Prepare to delete the previous game
  toDelete   = 23

  // Ask the player if they want to play again
  playing    = keyInYNStrict(replay, options)

  if (!playing) {
    console.clear()
    console.log(endGame)
  }
}

JavaScript
All the code… but where to put it?

I’ve given you all the code that you need to solve this challenge. Before you look at the complete solution below, do your best to find where these pieces of code should go.
Solution

Conclusion

If you have got this far, and your game is working, well done!

You have seen many basic ideas of JavaScript:

    Printing text to the Terminal
    Creating variables with const and let
    Working with strings of text
    Installing and using a Node package
    Using objects (such as options)
    Working with arrays and their zero-index counting system
    Using true and false
    How other values are treated as true or false
    Using if () { } else { } statements to choose a parentheses
    Using a while loop
    Using the debugger
    Doing simple Arithmetic (addition, subtraction, modulo)
    Creating random numbers
    Rounding numbers up or down to the nearest integer
    Exiting a script cleanly

You have also seen how the process of programming works:

    You create a mental image of what you are going to make
    You deal with one small problem at a time
    You test after each step that your code does what you expect it to
    You use a search engine to find answers to your questions
    You consult the documentation
    You run little tests, to check that you have understood
    You read error messages, to understand where your assumptions were wrong
    You enjoy taking on challenges
    You will be learning something new every day

Most importantly…

You have seen that it is possible to create something intriguing with only a little knowledge. You don’t have to have years of experience to produce something that others will find valuable.
Feedback

If you have any questions about this guide, or suggestions about how I can improve it, please create an issue in this project’s GitHub repository. I’ll get back to you as soon as I can.
Enjoy everything!

Preview

This guide is designed for JavaScript beginners. It will show you not just how to write simple code, but also how to convert an idea into a script, how to search online for ways to make progress, and how to think like a game developer.

You’ll be writing in plain JavaScript, using NodeJS, running on your desktop computer.
Simulation

I’ll start by showing you a simulation of the game that you will create - a simulation that runs here, in this page in your browser. Your game will not do that. My simulation is just to help you think about all the different pieces that you’ll need to create and how you will need to make them interact.

    Click on Start Game to activate it
    Play until you get tired of losing or until you are ready to start creating this for yourself.

Open in a different window

You can open this game in a different window, if you like, so that you can refer to it as you are working.
Who I am writing this for

At the school for web development where I work, students have seen all the code used in this game after only the first 10 days. The challenge for me was to create an activity for them that would impress their friends and family after such a short learning period.

Perhaps you haven’t even begun learning JavaScript yet. That’s OK. I’ll explain how to get started, and how to check, step-by-step, that you are on the right path.
Download the source files

You can download a ZIP file with three versions of the game in it from here. This is what the ZIP file contains:

    main.js: the script that you will be learning to write
    minified.js: a compressed version of the script that works exactly like main.js, but which hides how it works
    scores.js: a more advanced script which also keeps score.

See 6. A First JavaScript File for information on how to use node to run any of these files.

If you know about Git already, you can clone the repository for this whole project from here.
light
scroll

Feedback
github logo GitHub repository
